# Semantics of CAPIO-CL

In this section, we introduce the streaming semantics that allow a CAPIO-CL implementation to transform a batch,
file-based workflow into an in-situ workflow (i.e., a workflow where all steps are executed concurrently). To establish
the file synchronization semantics between consecutive workflow steps, two temporal aspects should be considered:

- Determining when there are no further updates to the file, referred to as the `commit rule`
- Identifying when a consumer can safely start reading a portion of data written in the file, known as the `firing rule`

In the following, we describe the semantics of the `commit rule` and then the semantics of the `firing rule`

## Commit rule

In the context of the producer-consumer paradigm, a file can be conceptualized as a data stream. The commit rule defines
when a given data stream terminates, i.e., all consumers have received the so-called `end-of-stream` message, which
tells them there will not be more data in input for that specific stream. The commit rule defines three distinct file
commit behaviors:

- `Commit on Termination (CoT)`: Upon termination of a workflow step, all produced data files are committed to the file
  system, becoming ready for consumption by all subsequent steps. The following Gant diagram visually explains the CoT
  semantics:

![The Commit on Termination rule](media/cot.png){ width=60% }

- `Commit on Close (CoC)`: This behavior allows subsequent steps to initiate reading a file as soon as the producer step
  invokes a close operation on a given file, signaling that all I/O operations on that file are completed. It is also
  allowed to consider a file committed after `n` close operations are performed. The following Gant diagram visually
  explains the CoC semantics:

![The Commit on Close rule](media/coc.png){ width=60% }

- `Commit on File (CoF)`: We can consider a file committed when another file has been committed. This proves beneficial
  when the number of `open()` and `close()` system calls operations for a given file is not statically known. Instead,
  we are aware that the I/O operations can be considered concluded on a given file if another file has been committed.
  This additional commit behavior introduces a dependency among files in the commit rule, expanding opportunities to
  leverage temporal parallelism for I/O operations across different workflow steps.The following Gant diagram visually
  explains the CoF semantics:

![The Commit on File rule](media/cof.png){ width=60% }

- `Commit on N-Files (CnF)`: The Commit on N-Files concept shifts the focus from individual file data streams to
  directories. Under the Commit on N-Files rule, a directory is considered committed once it contains at least N files.
  ![The Commit on N-Files rule](media/cnf.png){ width=60% }

## Firing rule

The firing rule defines when consumer modules of a file are permitted to consume stream data items (i.e., the file's
records) produced by producer modules. The file's data elements consumption can occur immediately or be delayed based on
specific events. Practically speaking, the commit rule dictates when a particular data stream concludes, indicating that
all consumers have received the so-called `end-of-stream` message, i.e., the notification that there will be no further
data records for that specific stream of data.

The CAPIO coordination language defines two distinct firing rules:

- `Fire on-commit` (FoC): whenever the commit rule is satisfied for a given file, the file is unequivocally ready to be
  consumed. In other words, the commit rule implies the firing rule for the entire file. This rule is identified in the
  CAPIO-CL coordination language file with the keyword `mode` and value `update`.
  The following Gant diagram visually explains the CoC semantics:

![The Fire on Commit rule](media/foc.png){ width=60% }

- `Fire no update` (FnU): file records already written by producer modules, can be consumed immediately: the file
  content is ready to be read as soon as data is written into the file. It is identified in the CAPIO-CL coordination
  language file with the keyword `mode` and value `no_update`.
  The following Gant diagram visually explains the CoC semantics:

![The Fire no Update rule](media/fnu.png){ width=60% }

## Consequences of streaming injection

There are two noteworthy scenarios. The first one arises when a consumer module attempts to open a file, which was
specified in the CAPIO-CL configuration file, that has not yet been created. In this case, the CAPIO-CL runtime will
halt the process executing the `open()` system call, and the `open()` will not return until the file is created. The
second scenario is when a consumer module tries to read a portion of a file that has not been written yet. This behavior
is nuanced as the `read()` system call may return fewer data elements (or even 0) than what was originally requested. In
this case, the consumer process initiating the `read()` will be paused by CAPIO-CL runtime until one of the following
conditions is met:

- the requested data is fully produced, and the `read()` system call returns the total number of bytes requested;
- all producer modules close the file (in the case of commit semantics being CoC) or terminate. Consequently, the
  `read()` system call will return the current number of bytes read, if any, or 0 to indicate the end of the file (EOF).

When the `no_update` rule is applied to the  `Commit on N-Files`, it is possible to enable streaming to the metadata of
the directories content. To be more precise, it is possible to deliver the metadata relative to a newly created file as
soon as it is created, so that dynamic streaming over the directory content can occur. The following picture visually
explains it better.

![Visual description of the FnU rule applied to CnF rule](media/fnu-cnf.png){ width=60% }
